.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" lamprop.1
.\" By: R.F. Smith <rsmith@xs4all.nl>
.\" $Date$
.\"
.Dd February 24, 2014
.Dt LAMPROP 1 CON
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lamprop
.Nd calculates properties of fiber-reinforced composite laminates.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h | Fl -help
.Op Fl l | Fl -latex
.Op Fl H | Fl -html
.Op Fl e | Fl -eng
.Op Fl m| Fl -mat
.Op Fl L| Fl -license
.Op Fl v| Fl -version
.Op Ar
.\" [-h] [-l | -H] [-e] [-m] [-L | -v] [file [file ...]]
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents
.Ql $Revision$
of the
.Nm
program, a program to calculate mechanical and thermal properties of
fiber-reinforced composite laminates.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl h Fl -help
Show this help message and exit.
.It Fl l Fl -latex
Output the generated properties as a LaTeX table. It makes use of the
.Xr booktabs
package. It in meant to be included in a LaTeX document (using
.Ql \e\input
), so it is not a self-contained LaTeX document.
.It Fl H Fl -html
Output the generated properties as a HTML table. It is meant to be inserted
into a HTML page so it doesn't contain
.Ql <head>
and
.Ql <body>
tags, but both
.Xr links 1
and
.Xr firefox 1
will render it properly without them.
.It Fl e Fl -eng
Produce the layers and engineering properties.
.It Fl m Fl -mat
Produce the ABD and abd matrices.
.It Fl L Fl -license
Print the license and exit.
.It Fl v Fl -version
Show program's version number and exit
.El
.Pp
It reads the composition of the laminates from one or more input files. The
format of these files is documented in
.Xr lamprop 5 .
.Pp
The program expects properties in metric units as specified in
.Xr lamprop 5 .
In short;
.Bl -hyphen -compact
.It
Young's moduli are given in MPa.
.It
Coefficients of thermal expansion are given in 1/K.
.It
Area weights are given in g/m2.
.It
Densities are given in g/cm3.
.El
.Pp
It then calculates the following values for all the laminates in the input
files:
.Bl -tag -width "Resin consumption" -compact
.It thickness
Total thickness of the laminate, in mm.
.It Vf
Fiber volume fraction. The fraction of the volume that the fibers
contribute to the laminate. This calculation assumes that there are no
voids in the laminate.
.It Wf
Fiber weight fraction. The fraction that the fibers contribute to the total
weight of the laminate.
.It Weight
The area weight of the laminate, in g/m2.
.It Resin consumption
The amount of resin embedded in the laminate, in g/m2.
.It E_x
Young's modulus in the x-direction, in MPa.
.It E_y
Young's modulus in the y-direction, in MPa.
.It G_xy
Shear modulus, in MPa.
.It v_xy and v_yx
Poisson constants.
.It cte_x
Coefficient of Thermal Expansion in the x-direction, in 1/K.
.It cte_y
Coefficient of thermal expansion in the y-direction, in 1/K.
.It ABD and abd
The stiffness and compliance matrices of the laminate.
.El
The ABD and adb matrices describe the properties of the laminate in
detail. Their format is as follows.
.Pp
.TS
tab( );
L C C C C C C C C L.
Nx  A11 A12 A16 B11 B12 B16  \(*ex
Ny  A12 A22 A26 B12 B22 B26  \(*ey
Nxy \(eq A16 A26 A66 B16 B26 B66 \(mu \(*exy
Mx  B11 B12 B16 D11 D12 D16  \(*kx
My  B12 B22 B26 D12 D22 D26  \(*ky
Mxy  B16 B26 B66 D16 D26 D66  \(*kxy
.TE
.TS
tab( );
L C C C C C C C C L.
\(*ex  a11 a12 a16 b11 b12 b16  Nx
\(*ey  a12 a22 a26 b12 b22 b26  Ny
\(*exy \(eq a16 a26 a66 b16 b26 b66 \(mu Nxy
\(*kx  b11 b12 b16 d11 d12 d16  Mx
\(*ky  b12 b22 b26 d12 d22 d26  Mky
\(*kxy  b16 b26 b66 d16 d26 d66  Mxy
.TE
.Pp
The units of the parts of the ABD and abd matrix are as follows (where x is 1,
2 or 6) :
.Bl -hyphen -compact
.It
Axx in N/mm.
.It
Bxx in N.
.It
Dxx in Nmm.
.It
axx in mm/N
.It
bxx in 1/N
.It
dxx in 1/Nm
.El
.Pp
The stress resultants N has units of force per unit of length (N/mm). The
moment resultant has units of torque per unit of length (Nmm/mm = N). Both
\(*e and \(*k are dimensionless.
.Pp
These values are written to the standard output, in the form specified by the
output options. The default is plain text output.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -tag -width foo -compact
.It Error: cannot read <name>.
The file
.Em filename
could not be opened for reading. This could be e.g because the file doesn't exist
or if the user doesn't have access rights to the file.
.It Error: no laminates found in <name>.
There were no 't:'-lines found in the file.
.It Error: laminate 'name' on line 'num' already exists. Skipping laminate.
This error occurs when you try to use the same laminate name more than once
within a run.
.It Error: No 'm:'-line after 't:'. Skipping laminate.
After defining a laminate name, you must specify the resin to be used in this
laminate.
.It Error: Unknown resin '<name>' on line <num>. Skipping laminate.
A resin was used that wasn't previously declared with a 'r:' line. Maybe the
name was misspelled?
.It Error: Unknown fiber '<name>' on line <num>. Skipping line.
A fiber was used that wasn't previously declared with a 'f:' line. Maybe the
name was misspelled?
.El
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
This version of the
.Nm
program requires the Python interpreter (version 2.7) and the Numerical
Python (numpy) extension (tested with version 1.6 and later).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lamprop 5 ,
.Xr python 1 ,
.Xr latex 1
.Rs
.%A M. W. Hyer
.%B Stress Analysis of Fiber Reinforced Composite Materials
.%I McGraw-Hill
.%C Boston, USA
.%D 1997
.Re
.Rs
.%A Stephen W. Tsai
.%B Theory of composites design
.%I Think Composites
.%C Dayton, USA
.%D 1992
.Re
.Rs
.%A A.T. Nettles
.%B Basic Mechanics of Laminated Plates
.%I NASA
.%C USA
.%D 1994
.Re
.Rs
.%A J.R. Vinson
.%A R.L. Sierakowski
.%B The Behavior of Structures Composed of Composite Materials
.%I Martinus Nijhoff Publishers
.%C Dordrecht, The Netherlands
.%D 1987
.Re
.Rs
.%A L.J. Hart-Smith
.%B The ten-percent rule for preliminary sizing of fibrous composite structures
.%J Weight Engineering
.%N 52
.%P 29-45
.%D 1992
.Re
.Rs
.%B The booktabs package
.%U http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/contrib/booktabs/
.Re
.Rs
.%B Python Programming Language - Official Website
.%U http://www.python.org/
.Re
.Rs
.%B Numerical Python
.%U http://numpy.scipy.org/
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
This program was written to automate the calculations necessary to obtain the
properties of a fiber reinforced laminate based on the properties of the
fibers and the matrix used. While these calculations are well documented in
the literature (see the references above), they are quite cumbersome to do by
hand.
.Pp
The original version of this program was written in C, since implementing it
in a spreadsheet proved cumbersome, inflexible and even produced incorrect
results. The C version ran up to 1.3.x.
.Pp
As an exercise in learning the language, the author ported the program to the
Python programming language. This proved to be a much cleaner, more
maintainable and shorter implementation.
.Pp
Additionally, the generally hard to obtain transverse fiber properties were
replaced with properties derived from the matrix.
.Xr git 1
revision control system.
.Sh AUTHOR
This manual and the
.Nm
software were written by
.An Roland Smith Aq rsmith@xs4all.nl .
.Pp
The latest version of this program is available at:
.Lk http://rsmith.home.xs4all.nl/software/
.Sh BUGS
Some of the calculations depend on the perpendicular modulus of the
fibers. This property is hard to find in product literature for anisotropic
fibers like carbon and aramid. In
.Xr lamprop 5
some values that the author has gathered are reproduced.
.Sh LICENSE
To the extent possible under law, Roland Smith has waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to this manual. This work is published from the
Netherlands. See
.Lk http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/
.Pp
The
.Nm
program itself is released under the two-clause BSD license given below;
.Pp
Copyright \(co 2011,2012 R.F. Smith <rsmith@xs4all.nl>. All rights reserved.
.Pp
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:
.Bl -tag -width "foo" -compact
.It 1.
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.It 2.
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or
other materials provided with the distribution.
.El
.Pp
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO
EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE,
EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" EOF
