.\" lamprop.5
.\" vim:ft=nroff
.\" By: R.F. Smith <rsmith@xs4all.nl>
.\" Last modified: 2016-06-04 13:47:35 +0200
.\"
.Dd June 4, 2016
.Dt LAMPROP 5 CON
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lamprop
.Nd This manpage documents the file format used by the
.Nm
program, version 3 and higher.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file format is based on JSON, with the extension that comments are
allowed.
.Pp
Two forms of comments are recognized. Everything after a double forward slash
(
.Li //
) up to the end of line is considered a comment and ignored. Furthermore, all
text between
.Li /*
and
.Li */
is also considered a comment and ignored.
.Pp
The file contents are JSON objects with the names
.Em fibers ,
.Em resins
and
.Em laminates .
.Pp
All these objects contain a
.Em list
of other objects.
.Pp
The
.Em resin
objects have the following form;
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"E": 4300, "nu": 0.3, "alpha": 40e-6, "density": 1.19, "name": "UP"}
.Ed
.Pp
Except for the
.Em name
which is a
.Em string ,
all values are
.Em numbers .
The
.Em E
object contains the Young's modulus of the resing in MPa.
The
.Em nu
object contains the Poisson constant of the resin, which is a dimensionless number.
The
.Em alpha
object
contains the coefficient of thermal expansion in 1/K.
The
.Em density
contains the density of the resin in g/cm3.
The
.Em name
is a chosen identifier for the resin. This must be unique within the file.
.Pp
The
.Em fiber
objects have the following form;
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"E1": 73000, "nu12": 0.33, "alpha1": 5.3e-6, "density": 2.60, "name": "e-glas"}
.Ed
.Pp
Again, everything except
.Em name
is a number.
.Em E1
is the Young's modulus in the fiber direction in MPa.
The
.Em nu12
is the Poisson's constant between the length direction and the radial
direction.
Here,
.Em alpha1
is the coefficient of thermal expansion in the fiber direction in 1/K.
The
.Em density
represents the density of the fiber in g/cm3.
The
.Em name
must be a unique identifier of the fiber.
.Pp
Usually, E1 and other properties in the fibre length direction are easily
obtained from a fiber supplier. Previous versions of this program also
required some properties perpendicular to the fiber to calculate transverse
properties of the lamina. Since these values are very hard to obtain, they
have been replaced by values derived from the matrix, according to Tsai(1992).
.Pp
The
.Em laminates
object contains a list of laminate definitions. A laminate definition looks
something like this;
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
    "name": "plain weave",
    "vf": 0.5,
    "matrix": "palatal P4-01",
    "lamina": [
        {"weight": 100, "angle": 0, "fiber": "e-glas"},
        {"weight": 100, "angle": 90, "fiber": "e-glas"}
    ],
    "symmetric": true
}
.Ed
.Pp
It contains the following required items.
The
.Em name
is a unique identifier for the laminate.
The
.Em matrix
contains the name of a resin.
The
.Em vf
is a number giving the general fiber volume fraction of the laminate. This is
expressed as a number between 0 and 1 or between 1 and 100. In the latter
case, the number is considered a percentage.
The
.Em lamina
object contains a list of lamina definitions.
The
.Em symmetric
object is optional. Leaving it out is identical to setting it as
.Em false .
If it is set as
.Em true ,
the list of lamina will be mirrored under the given list. So effectively,
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"weight": 100, "angle": 0, "fiber": "e-glas"},
{"weight": 100, "angle": 90, "fiber": "e-glas"}
.Ed
.Pp
becomes
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"weight": 100, "angle": 0, "fiber": "e-glas"},
{"weight": 100, "angle": 90, "fiber": "e-glas"},
{"weight": 100, "angle": 90, "fiber": "e-glas"},
{"weight": 100, "angle": 0, "fiber": "e-glas"}
.Ed
.Pp
In the lamina, the above given objects are mandatory. The
.Em weight
is the surface area weight of a layer in g/m2. The
.Em angle
indicates the counterclockwise rotation of the layer in degrees from the
horizontal x-axis.
The
.Em fiber
gives the name of the fiber to use for this layer.
Optionally, a lamina can also contain a
.Em vf
which indicates that this layer has a different fiber volume fraction. This
number has the same format as described above.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following is a sample input file for
.Nm .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
    "fibers": [
        {"E1": 230000, "nu12": 0.2, "alpha1": -0.54e-6, "density": 1.76,
         "name": "Hyer's carbon fiber"}
    ],
    "resins": [
        {"E": 4620, "nu": 0.36, "alpha": 41.4e-6, "density": 1.1, "name": "Hyer's resin"}
    ],
    "laminates": [
        {
            "name": "[0/90]s laminate",
            "vf": 0.5,
            "matrix": "Hyer's resin",
            "lamina": [
                {"weight": 100, "angle": 0, "fiber": "Hyer's carbon fiber"},
                {"weight": 100, "angle": 90, "fiber": "Hyer's carbon fiber"}
            ],
            "symmetric": true
        }
    ]
}
.Ed
.Pp
Below are some typical values used by the author for different kinds of
materials:
.TS
center;
C C C C L
R C C C L.
E1	nu12	alpha1	density	name
124000	0.30	-2e-6	1.44	HM aramid
233000	0.20	-0.38e-6	1.80	T700SC (HS carbon)
238000	0.20	-0.1e-6	1.77	STS5631 (HS carbon)
238000	0.20	-0.1e-6	1.77	UTS5631 (HS carbon)
640000	0.23	-1.1e-6	2.12	K63712 (UHM carbon)
72400	0.33	5e-6	2.54	e glass
.TE
.Pp
If anyone would be able to contribute additional material data, the author
would be grateful.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lamprop 1
.Rs
.%A Stephen W. Tsai
.%B Theory of composites design
.%I Think Composites
.%C Dayton, USA
.%D 1992
.Re
.Rs
.%A A.T. Nettles
.%B Basic Mechanics of Laminated Plates
.%I NASA
.%C USA
.%D 1994
.Re
.Sh AUTHOR
This manual and the
.Nm
software were written by
.An Roland Smith Aq rsmith@xs4all.nl .
.Pp
The latest version of this program is available at:
.Lk https://github.com/rsmith-nl/lamprop
.Sh LICENSE
To the extent possible under law, Roland Smith has waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to this manual. This work is published from the
Netherlands. See
.Lk http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/
.\" EOF
